Recipe

How to make veg manchurian gravy

For ease of reading, I have divided this post into 3 main parts.

Step 1 – making veg manchurian balls
Step 2 – frying veg manchurian balls
Step 3 – making manchurian gravy or sauce

Lets start with step 1 – Making vegetable balls

1. Take the finnaly chopped or gratted veggies in a bowl. you will 
   need 1/2 cup finnaly chopped red cabbage,1/2 cup grated carrot,
   1/4 cup finnaly chopped capsicum (green bell paper), 1/4 cup 
   finnaly chopped french beans and 1/4  cup finnaly chopped 
   spring onions.you can also add regular green cabbage instead 
   of red or purple cabbage

2. Then add the dry ingredients – 2 tablespoons corn starch,
    2 tablespoons all purpose flour (maida), ½ teaspoon black 
    pepper and ½ teaspoon salt or add as required.

3. Mix and gather the whole mixture together. Then kind of mix and 
   knead so that the veggies leave the water and you get a dough-like
   mixture. But do not knead like that a bread or roti dough. Gluten 
   strands can form that will give a dense chewy texture in the fried 
   veggie balls. So just mix very well and press so that the veggies 
   release their juices.

4. Then take a small portion of the mixture in your hands.

6. Make all veggie balls this way and keep aside. You can spread
   some oil on your palms while making the vegetable balls.

Step 2 – Frying vegetable balls

7. Heat oil for deep frying in a kadai or pan. Add a small piece 
   of a ball to the hot oil. If the balls does not stick or settle
   down at the bottom of the pan, but comes up steadily the oil is
   ready for frying these veggie balls. If the balls break, then
   some more binding agent is required. So you can add 2 to 3
   teaspoons of some more all-purpose flour (maida).

8. Gently place the balls in the hot oil. The oil has to be medium
   hot. Too much heat and the manchurian balls will be browned from
   top and uncooked from inside. Less hot oil will make the balls
   absorb too much oil.

9. When cooked from one side, turn the balls with a slotted spoon.

10. Fry the balls till crisp and golden turning them over a couple
    of times. Remove them with a slotted or perforated spoon and
    drain as much as oil as possible.

12. Place the fried manchurian balls on kitchen paper towels.
    For a low-fat version, you can cook the veggie balls in an 
    appe-appam pan or æbleskiver pan. Fry the veg balls this way in
    batches and keep aside.

14. In a small bowl take the following three sauces – ½ tablespoon 
    soy sauce (or 1.5 teaspoons soy sauce), 1 tablespoon tomato ketchup,
    2 to 3 teaspoons of red chilli sauce. The red chilli sauce is spicy
    and not sweet.

15. Mix the sauces very well and keep aside.

16. In another small bowl take 1 tablespoon cornflour (corn starch)
    and 2 tablespoons water. Mix very well and keep aside.

17. Heat 1 to 1.5 tablespoons oil in a pan or wok. Add 4 tablespoons
    chopped spring onions (scallions), 1 tablespoon finely chopped ginger,
    1 tablespoon finely chopped garlic, 2 green chilies (finely chopped)
    and ¼ cup finely chopped capsicum (green bell pepper).Adding capsicum
    is optional. You can use toasted sesame oil or sunflower oil or any
    neutral tasting oil.

18. Stir fry on medium flame till the onions turn translucent.

19. Now add the mixed sauces.

20. Stir and mix very well.

21. Add 1 to 1.25 cups water.

22. Let the mixture come to a boil.

23. Mix the corn flour paste again in the bowl (as the corn flour 
    settles at the bottom) and then add in the pan.

24. As soon as you add corn flour paste, mix very well so that
    there are no lumps.

25. Continue to stir and mix when the manchurian gravy is cooking. Simmer till the
    manchurian sauce thickens and you see a glaze in it. There should be no raw taste
    of the cornflour in the sauce.

    Cooking sauce or gravy takes about 3 to 4 minutes on a medium flame. If the sauce is
    too thick, then you add some water. If it is too thin, then you can add some cornflour.

26. When the manchurian gravy thickens, add ½ teaspoon black pepper powder.

27. Season with a bit of salt. Do keep in mind that the soy sauce, chilli sauce and tomato 
    ketchup already has salt in it. So add less salt and as per your taste preferences.    

28. Add ¼ to ½ teaspoon sugar or more if required. Mix very well.

29. Then add the fried vegetable balls. Also add 1 teaspoon rice vinegar or regular vinegar
    or apple cider vinegar.

30. Gently stir and coat the fried vegetable balls in the gravy.

31. Switch off the flame and add chopped spring onion greens.

32. Serve Veg Manchurian Gravy hot garnished with some spring onion greens (scallion greens). 
    It goes well with veg fried rice or schezwan fried rice or plain steamed rice or noodles and
    even bread or roti.


